.TH SHAPEPACK 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-shapetools" "SmartMet Tools"
.SH NAME
shapepack \- pack a polygonal shapefile into a fast 2D lookup table
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shapepack
.RI [ options ]
.I shapefile
.I outfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shapepack
reads a latitude/longitude polygonal shapefile and one of its
attributes, rasterizes the polygons at the chosen resolution and
writes a compact 2D table that can be queried at runtime with
.BR shapepick (1).
It was originally written to give a fast way to look up the timezone
of an arbitrary coordinate.
.PP
The packed file format is a small ASCII header (magic
.RB \(lq SHAPEPACK \(rq,
dimensions, bounding box and the list of distinct attribute values)
followed by a binary 2D index table. Latitude is the inner index, so
that consecutive memory addresses correspond to north\(hysouth steps.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\^\-help
Print help.
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\^\-verbose
Verbose mode.
.TP
.B \-V ", " \-\^\-version
Display version number.
.TP
.BI \-a " name" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-attribute " name
The shapefile attribute to pack.
.TP
.BI \-s " name" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-shapefile " name
The input shapefile, given without the trailing
.I .shp
suffix.
.TP
.BI \-o " file" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-output " file
The output shapepack filename.
.TP
.BI \-p " file" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-pngfile " file
Optional PNG file to render the rasterized polygons into for visual
inspection.
.TP
.BI \-z " file" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-zonefile " file
Optional shapepack to combine the new information with.
.TP
.BI \-W " px" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-width " px
Width, in pixels, of the rasterized table.
.TP
.BI \-H " px" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-height " px
Height, in pixels, of the rasterized table.
.TP
.BI \-\^\-lon1 " lon"
Bottom\(hyleft longitude of the area covered (default
.BR \-180 ).
.TP
.BI \-\^\-lat1 " lat"
Bottom\(hyleft latitude of the area covered (default
.BR \-90 ).
.TP
.BI \-\^\-lon2 " lon"
Top\(hyright longitude of the area covered (default
.BR 180 ).
.TP
.BI \-\^\-lat2 " lat"
Top\(hyright latitude of the area covered (default
.BR 90 ).
.TP
.B \-A ", " \-\^\-accurate
Use a more accurate (and slower) rasterization mode.
.SH EXAMPLES
Pack the
.B TZID
field of a world timezones shape:
.PP
.RS 4
shapepack \-s timezones \-a TZID \-o timezones.pack \-W 7200 \-H 3600
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shapepick (1),
.BR shapefilter (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-shapetools/issues>.
