.TH SHAPEFILTER 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-shapetools" "SmartMet Tools"
.SH NAME
shapefilter \- extract a subset of an ESRI shapefile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shapefilter
.RI [ options ]
.I inputshape
.I outputshape
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shapefilter
reads an ESRI shapefile and writes a new shapefile that contains only
the elements selected by the given options. Common uses are to extract
a single named region, to keep only the parts of the data that lie
inside a bounding box, or to separate national borders (which appear
twice when each country is stored as a separate polygon) from
shorelines (which appear once).
.PP
Both shape names are given without the
.I .shp
suffix.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-e
Keep only edges that appear an even number of times. This selects
common borders shared by adjacent polygons \(em e.g.\& national
borders in a country shapefile.
.TP
.B \-o
Keep only edges that appear an odd number of times. This selects
exterior boundaries \(em e.g.\& coastlines.
.TP
.BI \-f " name=value"
Keep only elements whose attribute
.I name
equals
.IR value .
.TP
.BI \-b " x1,y1,x2,y2"
Keep only elements that intersect the given longitude/latitude
bounding box, defined by its bottom\(hyleft and top\(hyright corners.
.SH EXAMPLES
Extract one named region:
.PP
.RS 4
shapefilter \-f NAME=Lielriga regions lielriga
.RE
.PP
Extract national borders from a country shapefile:
.PP
.RS 4
shapefilter \-e country borders
.RE
.PP
Extract shorelines (everything that is not a shared border):
.PP
.RS 4
shapefilter \-o country shoreline
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shapefind (1),
.BR shapepick (1),
.BR shapeproject (1),
.BR shape2xml (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-shapetools/issues>.
