.TH SHAPEPOINTS 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-shapetools" "SmartMet Tools"
.SH NAME
shapepoints \- thin a point shapefile by minimum distance
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shapepoints
.RI [ options ]
.I inputshape
.I outputshape
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shapepoints
reads a point ESRI shapefile (typically a list of cities or other
labels) and writes a new shapefile keeping only an evenly spaced
subset. Points are first sorted by a numeric attribute (so the
\(lqlarger\(rq points win the ties), and points that are too close to
an already accepted point or to the border of the projection area are
dropped.
.PP
A projection must be provided so that pixel\(hybased distances can be
evaluated.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Print help.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode.
.TP
.BI \-d " dist"
Minimum distance between accepted points, in pixels (default
.BR 10 ).
.TP
.BI \-D " dist"
Minimum distance from the area border, in pixels (default
.BR 0 ).
.TP
.BI \-p " desc"
Projection description used to translate latitude/longitude into
pixel coordinates. There is no default.
.TP
.BI \-f " name"
Numeric attribute used for sorting (default
.BR TYPE ).
Smaller values are preferred (i.e.\& accepted first).
.TP
.B \-n
Negate the field value, so larger values are preferred.
.SH EXAMPLES
Pick prominent European cities for a 400\(mu\(rs pixel stereographic map:
.PP
.RS 4
AREA=stereographic,25:6,51.3,49,70.2:400,\-1
.br
shapepoints \-p $AREA \-d 20 \-n ESRI/europe/places myplaces
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shapefilter (1),
.BR shapeproject (1),
.BR shape2ps (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-shapetools/issues>.
