.TH SHAPEFIND 1 "2026-05-02" "smartmet-shapetools" "SmartMet Tools"
.SH NAME
shapefind \- find shapefile elements closest to a coordinate
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shapefind
.RI [ options ]
.I shapefile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shapefind
searches an ESRI shapefile for the elements nearest to the given
coordinate and prints the requested attributes for each match. It was
originally created for finding the road segment closest to a given
point, but works for any point or polyline shape.
.PP
If the input shape is polygonal, the program instead prints the
single polygon that contains the search point. In that case the
options
.BR \-r ,
.B \-n
and
.B \-u
are not meaningful.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h ", " \-\^\-help
Print help.
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\^\-verbose
Verbose mode.
.TP
.B \-V ", " \-\^\-version
Display version number.
.TP
.BI \-a " list" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-attributes " list
Comma\(hyseparated list of shapefile attributes to print.
.TP
.BI \-u " name" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-unique " name
Force the named attribute to have unique values across the result set.
.TP
.BI \-s " name" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-shapefile " name
The shapefile, given without the trailing
.I .shp
suffix.
.TP
.BI \-c " expr" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-condition " expr
Search condition on attribute values, e.g.\&
.IR CLASS>2 .
.TP
.BI \-y " lat" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-lat " lat
Latitude of the search coordinate.
.TP
.BI \-x " lon" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-lon " lon
Longitude of the search coordinate.
.TP
.BI \-l " file" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-coordinatefile " file
File containing lines
.IR name,lon,lat ;
each line is processed as a separate search.
.TP
.BI \-r " km" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-radius " km
Maximum search radius, in kilometres.
.TP
.BI \-n " count" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-maxcount " count
Maximum number of matches to return.
.TP
.BI \-d " string" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-delimiter " string
Output column delimiter (default: TAB).
.TP
.BI \-p " desc" "\fR, \fP\-\^\-projection " desc
Projection in which distances are evaluated (default:
.IR latlon ).
.SH EXAMPLES
Find the nearest road within 10 km:
.PP
.RS 4
shapefind \-s roads \-x 24.94 \-y 60.17 \-r 10 \-a CLASS,NAME
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shapefilter (1),
.BR shapepick (1),
.BR shapeproject (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Finnish Meteorological Institute
.PP
Report issues at <https://github.com/fmidev/smartmet-shapetools/issues>.
